HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) is the primary protocol used for communication between clients and servers in the REST architecture. HTTP defines a set of request methods that are used to indicate the desired action to be performed for a given resource, as well as a set of response codes that indicate the status of the requested action.

The main HTTP request methods are:

1.  GET: Requests a representation of the specified resource(s). This method is used for retrieving information only and should not have any other effect on the server.
    
2.  POST: Submits an entity to the specified resource, often causing a change in state or side effects on the server.
    
3.  PUT: Replaces the specified resource with the request payload, or creates the resource if it doesn't exist.
    
4.  DELETE: Deletes the specified resource.
    
5.  PATCH: Applies partial modifications to the specified resource.
    
6.  HEAD: Requests a response identical to a GET request, but without the response body.
    

HTTP response codes indicate the status of the requested action and fall into five categories:

1.  Informational (100-199): Indicate that the server has received the request and is processing it.
    
2.  Successful (200-299): Indicate that the server has successfully processed the request and is returning the requested information.
    
3.  Redirection (300-399): Indicate that the requested resource has moved to a new location, and the client should use a different URI to access it.
    
4.  Client error (400-499): Indicate that the server was unable to process the request due to an error on the client side.
    
5.  Server error (500-599): Indicate that the server was unable to process the request due to an error on the server side.
    

Idempotency refers to the property of an operation or set of operations that can be repeated multiple times with the same effect. In the context of REST APIs, idempotent methods are those that can be called multiple times with the same parameters and produce the same result each time. For example, a GET request is idempotent because it does not change the state of the server, and multiple requests for the same resource should produce the same result.

Although HTTP is the most commonly used protocol in REST, it is not the only protocol that can be used. Other protocols, such as Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) and JavaScript Object Notation Remote Procedure Call (JSON-RPC), can also be used to implement RESTful web services. However, HTTP is widely used because it is a simple and flexible protocol that is well-suited for web applications.